Add NAP process for major proposals (#4299)
Napari/napari: docs/naps/0-nap-process.md

---
Author: "Juan Nunez-Iglesias <mailto:jni@fastmail.com>"
Created: '2022-03-23'
Status: Active
Type: Process
---

(nap0)=

# NAP 0 — Purpose and Process

## What is a NAP?

NAP stands for Napari Advancement Proposal. A NAP is a design document
providing information to the community, or describing a new feature for
napari or its processes or environment. The NAP should provide a rationale
for the proposed change as well as a concise technical specification, if
applicable.

We intend NAPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing major new

> features, for collecting community input on an issue, and for documenting

Reviewer: While I recognize it is difficult to clearly define, I think it would helpful to clarify what constitutes a "major new feature".

Also, do we need a process to require/request a NAP when a "major new feature" PR is made without a NAP?

Reviewer 2: I think one of the main motivations behind NAPs is to prevent people from putting too much work into something before a PR or set of PRs is ready for review - i.e. it's partly for the author/contributor to avoid wasting time/resources on something the community doesn't want. If the PR is ready and concise enough to review, then retroactively going through the NAP process seems less useful, unless there are strong objections to the PR.

I guess one of the other main motivations is to help document decisions, processes, and designs. So this might be one case in which retroactively writing a NAP for an existing PR might make sense - **more so** if the PR was ultimately closed because documentation of a rejected proposal is a really clear/quick way of deciding what we shouldn't work on in the future.

Author: There's several situations that might warrant a NAP, and they are all different, so it would indeed be good to enumerate them.

1. I think this is the most common: someone proposes a new feature, or a change in behaviour, or a change in process. This is done informally, either through an issue, or a new thread in Zulip. Often the response is unanimous ("Great idea! Can you open a PR?"), and then things can just go ahead. Some times, though, there is debate about whether the approach is a good one, or whether there's a different approach that might be better, or whether it's even in-scope for the project. In those situations, *even if consensus is reached*, a NAP would be warranted, in order to record the arguments that were considered for or against a particular approach. This is extremely important to avoid revisiting the same design questions over and over.
2. Same as above, but *consensus is **not** reached* in the initial discussion. At that point, without NAPs, usually what happens is that momentum is lost, and the idea remains in perpetual limbo. NAPs are a good mechanism to force a decision to be taken one way or another. The NAP should contain the arguments for or against, with links to the discussion, and then the core devs, or in extreme circumstances the steering council, can go ahead and make a decision, and work can proceed in one direction or another.
3. Finally, in many cases, design decisions are taken without much thought, or failing to consider particular use cases (for example from communities that at the time were not well-represented in the napari development community — e.g. our transforms API being so geared towards subsets of affine transforms). In those situations, discussion may arise as to why a particular design is one way. If we discuss and decide to keep behaviour unchanged, an Informational NAP could be warranted. If we decide to change things, then it reduces to case 1 or 2 and we go from there.

I do think 3 comes up pretty often, and I think that falls into what you would call "retroactive", @andy-sweet, and it can be a really good way to build up documentation around things that have been tried/not tried/dismissed.

I'll also point out that NAPs can be superseded, e.g. Python had several rejected proposals for Protocols/Structural Typing before one was accepted.

@kevinyamauchi as to what constitutes a "major" feature, I suggest that anything that expands the viewer API is one. `_experimental_` features wouldn't be. There's fuzzy ground in the middle and to be honest I think we need to use judgement there rather than have strong definitions.

Author: I've pushed a new section about when NAPs are warranted, feel free to edit further!

Also, @andy-sweet and @kevinyamauchi, could you add yourselves as Authors in the top section? I didn't do it because I didn't know which emails to use (if any), but you have now made important changes to this document! I'd be tempted to backport them to skimage and numpy if it wasn't going to be a massive uphill battle :joy:

Reviewer 2: Done. Thanks for the inclusion!

Reviewer 3: > Same as above, but consensus is not reached in the initial discussion. At that point, without NAPs, usually what happens is that momentum is lost, and the idea remains in perpetual limbo. NAPs are a good mechanism to force a decision to be taken one way or another. 

@jni could you expand on this a little? I don't immediately see how lack of consensus around an enhancement proposal is resolved with the NAP process, is there some time limit after which a NAP must be accepted, rejected or deferred?

Author: There's no strict time limit, but there is a mechanism to push it through or reject it:

> If there *are* substantive objections, then the NAP remains in
>`Draft` state, discussion continues as normal, and it can be
> proposed for acceptance again later once the objections are resolved.
> 
> In unusual cases, when no consensus can be reached between core developers,
> the [napari Steering Council] may be asked to decide whether a
> controversial NAP is `Accepted`.

Reviewer: > Also, @andy-sweet and @kevinyamauchi, could you add yourselves as Authors in the top section?

Done. Thanks!

Reviewer: > I've pushed a new section about when NAPs are warranted, feel free to edit further!

Thank you, I think this clarifies things a lot!

the design decisions that have gone into napari. The NAP author is
responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting
dissenting opinions.

Because the NAPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository,
their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal
[^id3].

### Types

There are three kinds of NAPs:

> 1. A **Standards Track** NAP describes a new feature or implementation

Reviewer 2: I've been thinking of two different types of proposals recently.

Something like a design doc, that describes the technical design of how we're planning to implement a feature we know we want, which is well described by this kind of NAP. This is useful both as technical documentation and as a way to drive consensus to a high level approach to solving a problem.

And a project plan or product requirements doc, that describes what we think is an important problem, but haven't agreed on how to solve yet. This is useful to explain why we started working on something and also helps define the scope of a project to a consumable size. This one isn't captured so well by this description, so I think we should either expand the description or add a new kind of NAP.

If we add a new kind of NAP, this splits problem definition and solution into two different documents, which probably isn't great. So another approach might be have two different stages of acceptance, where the technical solution simply adds to the accepted project plan/motivation document?

Author: Personally I would call that a standard tracks NAP and then add it in as Provisional. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Sounds like a good idea. Is Provisional a status, or should we mark certain NAPs as Provision or WIP in some other way? My main motivation here is get some kind of acceptance that a general project/effort is something that the napari community actually wants.

Author: I would just write it as Draft, then once community feedback has been satisfied but it's not implemented -> Provisional, then once the implementation is complete, -> Final.

Author: (according to the flowchart)

   for napari.
2. An **Informational** NAP describes a napari design issue, or provides
   general guidelines or information to the Python community, but does not
   propose a new feature. Informational NAPs do not necessarily represent a
   napari community consensus or recommendation, so users and

>    implementers are free to ignore Informational NAPs.

Reviewer: It is a bit unclear to me what the motivation is for initiating an "Informational" NAP. Is it to get feedback or consensus on an explanation or best practice (e.g., as a precusor for writing some explanatory documentation)?

I think I am just a little thrown off by the fact that an informational NAP doesn't necessarily reflect community consensus when it seems like the point of the NAP process is to build consensus: "Informational NAPs do not necessarily represent a
   napari community consensus or recommendation, so users and
   implementers are free to ignore Informational NAPs."

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I'm a little unsure about the motivation for this one too, both here and in NEPs. If it's mostly to be explanatory documentation around some technical design issue, my gut feeling is that should just be in the docs, reviewed as a docs PR, and published to some section of napari.org.

Author: PEP257 is an informational PEP, for example:

https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/

I must admit that looking at the [list of PEPs by category](https://peps.python.org/pep-0000/#index-by-category), I am underwhelmed by the informational PEPs! 😂

Nevertheless, it might be a good model to document decisions that might have generated a bunch of discussion. For example, maybe our release schedule would be an informational NAP?

Reviewer 2: I don't feel too strongly about removing them, especially as other communities have found a use for them. I feel like the release schedule topic might fit more into the a Process NAP, but maybe discussions around topic could justify their own NAP like you suggested. I think another example could be a document that describes the vision/ethos of napari as a project.

Reviewer 4: yeah, could take or leave.  but have no issues with including them.

Reviewer 5: I too am confused about the purpose of informational NAPs. I guess I could see them as "a place to put important discussions that have not yet reached a consensus but still need to be documented somewhere more useful than the meeting notes repository"?

Reviewer 6: I could see value if the informational NAP flags the lack of consensus intentionally, and if they get triaged to make actionable? Rather than informational though, they sound like opinion statements...

Reviewer 7: I also agree that this category is confusing. It seems a lot of these could benefit from just adding to our documentation instead. This line is interesting because I feel like most people would just ignore them, so then what's the benefit? "so users and implementers are free to ignore Informational NAPs".

I'm also fine with keeping them as other communities are using them, so not a strong opinion here.

Author: I've added some more discussion around informational NAPs. Since they are common practice in the broader Python community I am inclined to leave them. I have described the rationale in e1ab3be5.

`nap-35-lazy-slicing.md`). The draft must use the {ref}`nap_template` file.

Once the PR is in place, the NAP should be announced on various channels
for discussion, including the [#naps channel on Zulip]() and, if the NAP
has significant user implications, on the [image.sc forum]().

At the earliest convenience, the PR should be merged (regardless of whether
it is accepted during discussion). A NAP that outlines a coherent argument
and that is considered reasonably complete should be merged optimistically,
regardless of whether it is accepted during discussion. Additional PRs may
be made by the author to update or expand the NAP, or by maintainers to set
its status, discussion URL, etc.

Standards Track NAPs consist of two parts, a design document and a
reference implementation. It is generally recommended that at least a
prototype implementation be co-developed with the NAP, as ideas that sound
good in principle sometimes turn out to be impractical. Often it makes
sense for the prototype implementation to be made available as PR to the
napari repo, as long as it is properly marked as WIP (work in progress).

### Review and Resolution

> NAPs are discussed in Zulip, on image.sc, and on GitHub. The possible paths

Reviewer 2: I suggest trying to limit reviews and feedback to GitHub, so that the author of the NAP can address all important feedback without having to look in multiple places. Zulip and image.sc could be good places to discuss ideas and point people to the NAP PR on GitHub, but I worry that important feedback may be missed.

Author: Unfortunately my problem here is that discussion *does* happen in many channels, and NAP authors should be conscious of this and it is precisely the job of the NAP to bring together these disparate sources. ie if we say "should only happen on GitHub", then important discussion *will* be missed.

Reviewer 2: That's fair. So let's resolve this one.

developer can assign the NAP this status when no progress is being made on
the NAP.

A NAP can also be `Rejected`. Perhaps after all is said and done it
was not a good idea. It is still important to have a record of this
fact. The `Withdrawn` status is similar---it means that the NAP author
themselves has decided that the NAP is actually a bad idea, or has
accepted that a competing proposal is a better alternative.

When a NAP is `Accepted`, `Rejected`, or `Withdrawn`, the NAP should be
updated accordingly. In addition to updating the status field, at the very
least the `Resolution` header should be added with a link to the relevant
post on the discussion forum.

NAPs can also be `Superseded` by a different NAP, rendering the
original obsolete. The `Replaced-By` and `Replaces` headers
should be added to the original and new NAPs respectively.

Process NAPs may also have a status of `Active` if they are never
meant to be completed, e.g. NAP 0 (this NAP).

### How a NAP becomes Accepted

A NAP is `Accepted` by consensus of all interested contributors. We need a
concrete way to tell whether consensus has been reached. When you think a

> NAP is ready to accept, start a topic on the developer forum with a subject

Reviewer 2: Does this mean Zulip?

Author: yeah I don't know. :sweat_smile: scikit-image had a mailing list and SKIP discussion happened there, but then we moved to a Discourse forum that is *different* from image.sc, which is more usage-focused. But I don't want to create another forum for napari.

like:

> Proposal to accept NAP #\<number>: \<title>

In the body of the topic, you should:

- link to the latest version of the NAP,
- briefly describe any major points of contention and how they were
  resolved,
- include a sentence like: "If there are no substantive objections

>   within 7 days from this email, then the NAP will be accepted; see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  within 7 days from this post, then the NAP will be accepted; see
```

Reviewer: Also, do we want to specify a minimum amount of time? Given that many of our contributors are par time volunteers, it might be good ensure the is sufficient time for review.

Reviewer: Ah I see the section below. 7 Days seems like a reasonable minimum to me.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I was a little concerned that 7 days was too short, but then realized this is like a final call for feedback/rejections. So should have already been many weeks of discussion and feedback leading up to that point, right? If so, this is good with me.

  NAP 0 for more details."

For an equivalent example in the NumPy library, see: <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/numpy-discussion/2018-June/078345.html>

> After you send the email, you should make sure to link to the email

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you send the email, you should make sure to link to the developer forum
```

thread from the `Discussion` section of the NAP, so that people can
find it later.

> Generally the NAP author will be the one to send this email, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally the NAP author will be the one to make this post, but
```

anyone can do it – the important thing is to make sure that everyone
knows when a NAP is on the verge of acceptance, and give them a final
chance to respond. If there's some special reason to extend this final
comment period beyond 7 days, then that's fine, just say so in the

> email. You shouldn't do less than 7 days, because sometimes people are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
post. You shouldn't do less than 7 days, because sometimes people are
```

> travelling or similar and need some time to respond.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
traveling or similar and need some time to respond.
```

😉

In general, the goal is to make sure that the community has consensus,
not provide a rigid policy for people to try to game. When in doubt,
err on the side of asking for more feedback and looking for
opportunities to compromise.

If the final comment period passes without any substantive objections,
then the NAP can officially be marked `Accepted`. You should send a

> followup email notifying the list (celebratory emoji optional but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
followup post notifying the thread (celebratory emoji optional but
```

encouraged 🎉✨), and then update the NAP by setting its `:Status:`
to `Accepted`, and its `:Resolution:` header to a link to your

> followup email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
followup post.
```

If there *are* substantive objections, then the NAP remains in
`Draft` state, discussion continues as normal, and it can be
proposed for acceptance again later once the objections are resolved.

In unusual cases, when no consensus can be reached between core developers,

> the [scikit-image Steering Council] may be asked to decide whether a

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the [napari Steering Council] may be asked to decide whether a
```

Author: I seriously thought I'd done a search for all instances, but clearly not! :joy:

reached the Final state, as the code and project documentation are
considered the ultimate reference for the implemented feature. They may,
however, be updated under special circumstances.

Process NAPs may be updated over time to reflect changes
to development practices and other details. The precise process followed in
these cases will depend on the nature and purpose of the NAP being updated.

## Format and Template

NAPs are UTF-8 encoded text files using the [MyST markdown] format.  Please
see the {ref}`nap_template` file and the [MyST markdown cheat sheet] for
more information.  We use [Sphinx] to convert NAPs to HTML for viewing on
the web [^id4].

### Header Preamble

Each NAP must begin with a header preamble.  The headers
must appear in the following order.  Headers marked with `*` are
optional.  All other headers are required.

```
  :Author: <list of authors' real names and optionally, email addresses>
  :Status: <Draft | Active | Accepted | Deferred | Rejected |
           Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
  :Type: <Standards Track | Process>
  :Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
* :Requires: <nap numbers>

> * :skimage-Version: <version number>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :napari-Version: <version number>
```

Actually, I'm not sure what this version number means. Is this the version of napari when the proposal was made? Or the version we're trying to get this proposal into?

Author: It's the version in which the contents of the NAP were implemented.

---

> Author: "Juan Nunez-Iglesias <mailto:jni@fastmail.com>"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Author: "Juan Nunez-Iglesias <mailto:jni@fastmail.com>"
Author: "Andy Sweet <mailto:andrewdsweet@gmail.com>"
```

---
Author: "Juan Nunez-Iglesias <mailto:jni@fastmail.com>"

> Author: "Andy Sweet <mailto:andrewdsweet@gmail.com>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Author: "Andy Sweet <mailto:andrewdsweet@gmail.com>"
Author: "Kevin Yamauchi <mailto:kevin.yamauchi@gmail.com>"
```

Created: '2022-03-23'
Status: Active
Type: Process
---

(nap0)=

# NAP 0 — Purpose and Process

## What is a NAP?

NAP stands for Napari Advancement Proposal. A NAP is a design document
providing information to the community, or describing a new feature for

> napari or its processes or environment. The NAP should provide a rationale

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
napari, its processes or its environment. The NAP should provide a rationale
```

for the proposed change as well as a concise technical specification, if
applicable.

We intend NAPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing major new
features, for collecting community input on an issue, and for documenting
the design decisions that have gone into napari. The NAP author is
responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting
dissenting opinions.

Because the NAPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository,
their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal
[^id3].

### When is a NAP warranted?

Most contributions to napari should go through the standard [contributing
process](napari-contributing), that is, opening a pull request to the main
repository. They will typically be uncontroversial improvements, and
require little design discussion. The git commit and the pull request
itself serve as an adequate record of the contribution's history.

In some cases, contributions will require extensive discussions around any
new APIs, breaking of existing APIs, changing of governance, build, or
contributing mechanisms, or other aspects of the project. These might

> happen both on the PR itself and on other channels, such as Zulip,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
happen both on an already opened PR and on other channels, such as Zulip,
```

community meetings, or even one on one discussions. In such situations, the
PR will not contain sufficient information to document all the
considerations that went into a decision. Core developers may at their
discretion then call for a NAP to summarize the discussion to date.

In addition to the above situation, napari is the product of many
historical decisions that were *not* explained by a NAP. In situations
where community members might be confused about parts of napari's design,
and whether alternate designs were considered and rejected, or simply not

> considered. It might then be useful to write a retrospective informational

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
considered, it might then be useful to write a retrospective informational
```

NAP to explain that aspect of the project.

### Types of NAPs

There are three kinds of NAPs:

1. A **Standards Track** NAP describes a new feature or implementation
   for napari.
2. An **Informational** NAP describes a napari design issue, or provides

>    general guidelines or information to the Python community, but does not

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   general guidelines or information to the napari community, but does not
```

   propose a new feature. Informational NAPs do not necessarily represent a
   napari community consensus or recommendation, so users and
   implementers are free to ignore Informational NAPs.
3. A **Process** NAP describes a process surrounding napari, or
   proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process NAPs are
   like Standards Track NAPs but apply to areas other than the napari
   library itself. They may propose an implementation, but not to

>    napari's codebase; they require community consensus. Examples include

Reviewer 9: We should link to our existing [decision making process](https://napari.org/community/governance.html#decision-making-process) which describes both how we are consensus seeking and how decisions that are deadlocked can be resolved

   procedures, guidelines, changes to the decision-making process, and

>    changes to the tools or environment used in scikit-image development.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   procedures, guidelines, changes to the decision-making process, and
   changes to the tools or environment used in napari development.
```

would also kind of like to include something along the lines of "decisions that have broader implications for the napari ecosystem"?

Author: > `- scikit-image`
> `+ napari`

gdi. :joy: 

> would also kind of like to include something along the lines of "decisions that have broader implications for the napari ecosystem"?

Yup, will add.

   Any meta-NAP is also considered a Process NAP.

## NAP Workflow

The NAP process begins with a new idea for napari. A NAP should contain a
single key proposal or new idea. Small enhancements or patches often don't
need a NAP and can be injected into the napari development workflow with a
pull request to the napari [repo]. The more focused the NAP, the more
likely it is to be accepted.

Each NAP must have a champion---someone who writes the NAP using the style
and format described below, shepherds the discussions in the appropriate
forums, and attempts to build community consensus around the idea. The NAP
champion (a.k.a. Author) should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea
is suitable for a NAP. Posting to the napari [issues list] is the best
way to do this.

The proposal should be submitted as a draft NAP via a [GitHub pull
request][github pull request] to the `docs/source/naps` directory with the

> name `nap-<n>-<short-title>.md` where `<n>` is an appropriately assigned

Reviewer 10: What is an appropriately assigned number? Any schemes like PEPs have?

Author: I've added a clarification that this is "typically sequential", with "typically" indicating that we might deviate from that in some circumstances (though I don't expect to, honestly).

number and `<short-title>` is a one or two word title for the idea (e.g.,
`nap-35-lazy-slicing.md`). The draft must use the {ref}`nap_template` file.

Once the PR is in place, the NAP should be announced on various channels
for discussion, including the [#naps channel on Zulip]() and, if the NAP
has significant user implications, on the [image.sc forum]().

At the earliest convenience, the PR should be merged (regardless of whether

> it is accepted during discussion). A NAP that outlines a coherent argument

Reviewer 4: 👍 cool

and that is considered reasonably complete should be merged optimistically,
regardless of whether it is accepted during discussion. Additional PRs may
be made by the author to update or expand the NAP, or by maintainers to set
its status, discussion URL, etc.

Standards Track NAPs consist of two parts, a design document and a
reference implementation. It is generally recommended that at least a
prototype implementation be co-developed with the NAP, as ideas that sound
good in principle sometimes turn out to be impractical. Often it makes

> sense for the prototype implementation to be made available as PR to the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
sense for the prototype implementation to be made available as a PR to the
```

napari repo, as long as it is properly marked as WIP (work in progress).

### Review and Resolution

NAPs are discussed in Zulip, on image.sc, and on GitHub. The possible paths
of the status of NAPs are as follows:

```{image} _static/nap-flowchart.png
```

All NAPs should be created with the `Draft` status.

The author of the NAP should periodically update the NAP with new points
both against and in favor of the NAP raised in discussion.

Eventually, after discussion, there may be a consensus that the NAP
should be accepted – see the next section for details. At this point
the status becomes `Accepted`.

Once a NAP has been `Accepted`, the reference implementation must be
completed. When the reference implementation is complete and incorporated
into the main source code repository, the status will be changed to
`Final`.

To allow gathering of additional design and interface feedback before

> committing to long term stability for a language feature or standard

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
committing to long term stability for a feature or standard
```

library API, a NAP may also be marked as "Provisional". This is short for
"Provisionally Accepted", and indicates that the proposal has been accepted
for inclusion in the reference implementation, but additional user feedback

> is needed before the full design can be considered "Final". Unlike regular

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
is needed before the full design can be considered "Accepted". Unlike regular
```
I found this and the diagram here surprising. I would have expected it goes from "Provisional" -> "Accepted"  once additional user feedback is incorporated and then goes to "Final" when the reference implementation is included in the code base (see lines above)

Reviewer 7: Agreed, I think that makes more sense - for everything that moves to final, it should be "Accepted".

Author: I see your point 100% and indeed I myself raised an eyebrow at the diagram, but I'm reluctant to change this because (a) "Provisional" means "Provisionally Accepted", and reading the text it's really rather "Accepted Pending Implementation", (b) I didn't make the diagram and don't particularly want to remake it :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye:, and (c) it's literally the same diagram followed by Python, NumPy, skimage, and sklearn, so imho there should be a large barrier of activation for deviating from it.

accepted NAPs, provisionally accepted NAPs may still be Rejected or
Withdrawn even after the related changes have been included in a release.

Wherever possible, it is considered preferable to reduce the scope of a

> proposal to avoid the need to rely on the "Provisional" status (e.g. by

Reviewer 9: Yeah, agreed - this is also why I like the idea that something "Provisional" has to actually graduated into "Accepted", but maybe I'm not quite appreciating all the nuance here

Author: I don't think it's that you're not appreciating the nuance, but rather, you're overthinking the nuance. I think that in practice, you typically go Provisional -> (implement) -> Final or Provisional -> (implement) -> (oops, actually huge problems) -> (reject/withdraw).

If anything, I feel like the line between Accepted and Final is blurry. But in all of these cases, I don't think it's worth overthinking it vs adopting a process that has been in place for at least two decades and as far as I know not really caused any major furore (other than the walrus operator, and that seems to have died down, and anyway I don't think this nitpick would have saved the situation there :joy:)

deferring some features to later NAPs), as this status can lead to version
compatibility challenges in the wider ecosystem.

A NAP can also be assigned status `Deferred`. The NAP author or a core
developer can assign the NAP this status when no progress is being made on
the NAP.

A NAP can also be `Rejected`. Perhaps after all is said and done it
was not a good idea. It is still important to have a record of this
fact. The `Withdrawn` status is similar---it means that the NAP author
themselves has decided that the NAP is actually a bad idea, or has
accepted that a competing proposal is a better alternative.

> When a NAP is `Accepted`, `Rejected`, or `Withdrawn`, the NAP should be

Reviewer 9: Should we add `Deferred` to this list too?

Author: Updated.

updated accordingly. In addition to updating the status field, at the very
least the `Resolution` header should be added with a link to the relevant
post on the discussion forum.

NAPs can also be `Superseded` by a different NAP, rendering the
original obsolete. The `Replaced-By` and `Replaces` headers
should be added to the original and new NAPs respectively.

Process NAPs may also have a status of `Active` if they are never
meant to be completed, e.g. NAP 0 (this NAP).

### How a NAP becomes Accepted

> A NAP is `Accepted` by consensus of all interested contributors. We need a

Reviewer 9: Again here I would add a link to our existing decision making process and how we approach consensus https://napari.org/community/governance.html#decision-making-process

Author: @sofroniewn I've added the caveat "Generally, a NAP is accepted...", then linked to governance at the bottom of this section, following the model of describing the "happy path" first and the caveats later.

concrete way to tell whether consensus has been reached. When you think a
NAP is ready to accept, start a topic on the Zulip naps channel with a

> subject like:

Reviewer 4: slight preference for this to be on github (or somewhere other than zulip).  zulip history is very hard to search, and appears to be ephemeral?

Reviewer 5: +1 to this I feel like GitHub is a better place to put this discussion for the reasons Talley mentioned, and also because it *feels* more public

Reviewer 3: agree, +1 for GitHub

Reviewer 9: yeah +1 GitHub not zulip being the final record. Fine to start convo in zulip as maybe easier to build consensus with realtime convo, but place of record should be GitHub, possibly with links to any essential Zulip convos. We could use either GitHub issue or GitHub discussion, I'd be open to either

Author: I'll say three things. First, the final record of discussion is the NAP itself. Second, Zulip is as far as I know *not* ephemeral — old Zulip links resolve fine for me. Search on Zulip is not great but it's not the access mechanism here: the thread will be permalinked from the NAP. (And it's important to note that loginless Zulip is currently being tested in self-hosted instances and coming in the hosted version, zulip/zulip#4817.) Third, and I think this is the main reason that other projects *don't* use GitHub, Zulip is an open source platform, which means if they close up shop we can grab our data and self-host and everything will still work. If GitHub decides to shut down their API we are left in the lurch.

Now, it's absolutely valid to say, screw it, In GitHub We Trust, and just go with it, as we implicitly do with virtually all our development. Clearly if GH closes up we have bigger problems than the complete NAP discussion record! 😂 But I just wanted to write down the rationale for why none of the other SKIP/NEP/PEP mechanisms use GH as the main record of these decisions and have us take the decision with that rationale in mind.

> Proposal to accept NAP #\<number>: \<title>

In the body of the topic, you should:

- link to the latest version of the NAP,
- briefly describe any major points of contention and how they were
  resolved,
- include a sentence like: "If there are no substantive objections
  within 7 days from this post, then the NAP will be accepted; see
  NAP 0 for more details."

For an equivalent example in the NumPy library, see: <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/numpy-discussion/2018-June/078345.html>

After you write the post, you should make sure to link to the specific
thread from the `Discussion` section of the NAP, so that people can
find it later.

Generally the NAP author will be the one to make this post, but
anyone can do it – the important thing is to make sure that everyone
knows when a NAP is on the verge of acceptance, and give them a final
chance to respond. If there's some special reason to extend this final
comment period beyond 7 days, then that's fine, just say so in the
post. You shouldn't do less than 7 days, because sometimes people are

> traveling or similar and need some time to respond.

Reviewer 10: This paragraph gives me a general "informal" feel which sticks out from the rest. Not necessarily a bad thing, I just wanted to point it out, but maybe it's better to keep a consistent tone.

Reviewer 9: yeah, it's not clear to me if this is the place where we are defining the 7 day comment period as a golden rule or if it's just a guideline and courtesy. Might want to be a bit more explicit. I guess coding work can be going on in background, so 7 day period won't be too blocking. It feels a little long to me. I'd also be open to 3 or 5, but maybe 7 is safest

Author: @sofroniewn 7 is an absolute minimum, to be honest. NAPs can contain very major decisions, which often are discussed ahead of time but some people might be too busy to engage the earlier discussions, or might have missed them altogether. They should still get a chance to comment before a NAP becomes accepted.

In general, the goal is to make sure that the community has consensus,
not provide a rigid policy for people to try to game. When in doubt,

> err on the side of asking for more feedback and looking for

Reviewer 5: 👏

Reviewer 9: Ah ok - I might put this higher, set the tone a little bit right from the start

opportunities to compromise.

If the final comment period passes without any substantive objections,
then the NAP can officially be marked `Accepted`. You should send a
followup post notifying the thread (celebratory emoji optional but
encouraged 🎉✨), and then update the NAP by setting its `:Status:`
to `Accepted`, and its `:Resolution:` header to a link to your
followup post.

If there *are* substantive objections, then the NAP remains in
`Draft` state, discussion continues as normal, and it can be
proposed for acceptance again later once the objections are resolved.

In unusual cases, when no consensus can be reached between core developers,
the [napari Steering Council] may be asked to decide whether a

> controversial NAP is `Accepted`.

Reviewer 9: Again I might link to the existing decision making process https://napari.org/community/governance.html#decision-making-process

optional.  All other headers are required.

```
  :Author: <list of authors' real names and optionally, email addresses>
  :Status: <Draft | Active | Accepted | Deferred | Rejected |
           Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
  :Type: <Standards Track | Process>
  :Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
* :Requires: <nap numbers>
* :napari-Version: <version number>
* :Replaces: <nap number>
* :Replaced-By: <nap number>
* :Resolution: <url>
```

The Author header lists the names, and optionally the email addresses of
all the authors of the NAP. The format of the Author header value must be

> Random J. User \<<mailto:address@dom.ain>>

if the email address is included, and just

> Random J. User

if the address is not given.  If there are multiple authors, each should be
on a separate line.

## Discussion

- <https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/4299>

## References and Footnotes

[^id3]: This historical record is available by the normal git commands
    for retrieving older revisions, and can also be browsed on
    [GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/docs/naps).

[^id4]: The URL for viewing NAPs on the web is
    <https://napari.org/naps/>

> 

Reviewer 9: Can you maybe add a section on acknowledgements - maybe call out some of the PEP and SKIP processes that I think we're heavily inspired by. Those links could help us resolve issues if we have failed to anticipate them yet and need to look to others for guidance

---
Author: "Juan Nunez-Iglesias <mailto:jni@fastmail.com>"
Author: "Andy Sweet <mailto:andrewdsweet@gmail.com>"
Author: "Kevin Yamauchi <mailto:kevin.yamauchi@gmail.com>"
Created: '2022-03-23'
Status: Active
Type: Process
---

(nap0)=

# NAP 0 — Purpose and Process

## What is a NAP?

NAP stands for Napari Advancement Proposal. A NAP is a design document
providing information to the community, or describing a new feature for

> napari or its processes or environment. The NAP should provide a rationale

Reviewer 11: This portion needs to be more explicit about the scope of NAPs

1. Is the NAP process limited in scope to only napari, as is described here?
2. Does it extend to other official napari projects that live under the `napari` Github organization, such as magicgui, napari-sphinx-theme, cookiecutter-napari-plugin, and npe2?
3. Does it extend to pieces of the napari ecosystem that are beyond napari's governance, such as plugins (including napari-error-reporter), the napari hub, Bioimage Model Zoo, PyPI, Github, etc?

(2) seems like the scope which is most consistent with the scope of the existing governance documents: https://napari.org/community/governance.html

for the proposed change as well as a concise technical specification, if
applicable.

We intend NAPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing major new

> features, for collecting community input on an issue, and for documenting

Reviewer 6: when we say "community", we mean developer community here, not broad napari user community (im assuming)? I think it's helpful to be specific, given that some major proposals will benefit from exploration with the end users it may impact.

Author: This actually does mean the broader community, including users. NAPs are announced on all major communications channels used by napari, so the broader community will absolutely have a way to be involved.

Reviewer 6: That makes sense! We should definitely encourage review by non-developer users when this is rolled out (ex: explain the process on the website) I would caution 2 things:
1. github can be intimidating/ not in the usual workflow of a non-coding community member (as we learned in year 1 napari survey) so our non coding users may be reticent to engage 
2. broader community involvement may still not be representative of our goal user community, and thus would be valuable to flag when we may have blind spots for a NAP (in which case we may want to implement an MVP while we explore how to make a certain feature broadly accessible, or counter balance potential bias in other ways).

Again, the NAP sounds like it may be more heavily focused on technical implementation consensus, in which case these user motivation curiosities would  be a pre-step.

Author: re github, I'll just note that we do aim to discuss NAPs on the imagesc forum, so that'll cast a slightly broader net. However, you're right that long term, as we have more and more non-coding users, there needs to be a separate process for user feedback. I think that is beyond the scope of NAPs.

napari here is quite unique because none of the things we are based on (PEPs, NEPs, etc) target non-coders *at all*. Since we need NAPs semi-urgently, though, I suggest we discuss this (whether to roll user feedback into the NAP process, or to create a different process for non-coding users) in a future issue.

the design decisions that have gone into napari. The NAP author is
responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting
dissenting opinions.

Because the NAPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository,
their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal
[^id3].

### When is a NAP warranted?

Most contributions to napari should go through the standard [contributing
process](napari-contributing), that is, opening a pull request to the main
repository. They will typically be uncontroversial improvements, and
require little design discussion. The git commit and the pull request
itself serve as an adequate record of the contribution's history.

> In some cases, contributions will require extensive discussions around any

Reviewer 6: is there a way to gauge (or structure) the expected timing relative to the NAP? I'd love for these to create space for bigger picture ideas, ones that might be best served with some deeper user engagement, but that would require having it on a roadmap for a few months down the road. Maybe that's an option based on the level of discussion (ie if the discourse surfaces a certain amount of unknowns it's deemed worthy of user exploration?), maybe there's a different mechanism in which we surface these larger user experience curiousities from the developer group, but i do think that's missing in our existing process.

Reviewer 6: I'd more broadly recommend a quarterly/halfly review of roadmap intentions, user experience expectations, and working session of outstanding assumptions/unknowns about the users and their experience. This sort of working session (which I'm happy/excited to run!) could allow us to hear from the napari core developer community and do some research ahead of potential NAP ideas.

Author: @LCObus I love these ideas, but honestly in my opinion NAPs are the *output* of such sessions. ie if you want to run a user experience survey thingy, run it, make an issue with the results, and then if anything in that issue requires it, make a NAP. Does that make sense?

Reviewer 6: It does! My questions are about the happenings pre-NAP, that connect the input to the output.  How might we integrate user experience research into a community sourced NAP system? In other words:
1. How might we build a collective roadmap that socializes bigger community questions so that those questions can be supported by rigorous user experience research? (A roadmap would also mitigate potential redundant NAPs)
3. How might someone with a potential NAP but outstanding exploratory questions socialize those questions in a way that they could be prioritized into a study that supports their eventual NAP?

Author: They are very good questions but imho questions that should be resolved after this PR, not during this PR. We can maybe even create a NAP for pre-NAPs. 😂 Bonus points if you can come up with a backronym for "LULLABY" 😜

Reviewer 6: love it.

considered. It might then be useful to write a retrospective informational
NAP to explain that aspect of the project.

### Types of NAPs

There are three kinds of NAPs:

1. A **Standards Track** NAP describes a new feature or implementation
   for napari.
2. An **Informational** NAP describes a napari design issue, or provides
   general guidelines or information to the Python community, but does not
   propose a new feature. Informational NAPs do not necessarily represent a
   napari community consensus or recommendation, so users and
   implementers are free to ignore Informational NAPs.
3. A **Process** NAP describes a process surrounding napari, or
   proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process NAPs are
   like Standards Track NAPs but apply to areas other than the napari
   library itself. They may propose an implementation, but not to
   napari's codebase; they require community consensus. Examples include
   procedures, guidelines, changes to the decision-making process, and
   changes to the tools or environment used in scikit-image development.
   Any meta-NAP is also considered a Process NAP.

## NAP Workflow

> The NAP process begins with a new idea for napari. A NAP should contain a

Reviewer 6: I'm curious about the nature of this "newness"- how you see NAPs relating to current/future roadmaps (ideally we get better at sharing these publically). It'd be great to know if a NAP tags to a priority in an existing roadmap, pushes thoughtfully against an existing priority (and the argument is therefore it should get implemented sooner rather than later), or is a mechanism to introduce a future idea for a down the road implementation? For design and UXR, this would be helpful to flag and assess (getting ahead of the new ideas to help support them with interviews, clarity mapping, etc, is a value add UXR can support).

Author: I would say that prioritisation in a broad community project like napari happens outside of NAPs. A NAP is a method to decide *whether or not* a new idea will make it into napari. It is up to individual contributors to implement that idea, and nothing we write on a NAP can make that happen.

As regards roadmaps, ideally, everything on a roadmap has a corresponding Provisional or Accepted NAP, but it will take some time to get to that state, since NAPs are not yet implemented and there's lots of ideas we've agreed on already.

Also, in some cases a roadmap might say "we are prioritising drawing down bugs this next quarter", and one certainly does not need a NAP to fix a bug. :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye:

Wherever possible, it is considered preferable to reduce the scope of a
proposal to avoid the need to rely on the "Provisional" status (e.g. by
deferring some features to later NAPs), as this status can lead to version
compatibility challenges in the wider ecosystem.

A NAP can also be assigned status `Deferred`. The NAP author or a core
developer can assign the NAP this status when no progress is being made on
the NAP.

A NAP can also be `Rejected`. Perhaps after all is said and done it
was not a good idea. It is still important to have a record of this
fact. The `Withdrawn` status is similar---it means that the NAP author
themselves has decided that the NAP is actually a bad idea, or has
accepted that a competing proposal is a better alternative.

When a NAP is `Accepted`, `Rejected`, or `Withdrawn`, the NAP should be
updated accordingly. In addition to updating the status field, at the very
least the `Resolution` header should be added with a link to the relevant
post on the discussion forum.

NAPs can also be `Superseded` by a different NAP, rendering the
original obsolete. The `Replaced-By` and `Replaces` headers
should be added to the original and new NAPs respectively.

> Process NAPs may also have a status of `Active` if they are never

Reviewer 7: Is there an "Inactive" status for process NAPs that are no longer active or have been replaced?

Author: Evidently not! Again, it's important to note that this process is not something we came up with but inherited from Python and the rest of the ecosystem. I would like to merge this with minimal changes so that we have it in place, then potentially create new NAPs to improve the process.

  NAP 0 for more details."

For an equivalent example in the NumPy library, see: <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/numpy-discussion/2018-June/078345.html>

After you write the post, you should make sure to link to the specific
thread from the `Discussion` section of the NAP, so that people can
find it later.

Generally the NAP author will be the one to make this post, but
anyone can do it – the important thing is to make sure that everyone
knows when a NAP is on the verge of acceptance, and give them a final
chance to respond. If there's some special reason to extend this final
comment period beyond 7 days, then that's fine, just say so in the
post. You shouldn't do less than 7 days, because sometimes people are
traveling or similar and need some time to respond.

In general, the goal is to make sure that the community has consensus,
not provide a rigid policy for people to try to game. When in doubt,
err on the side of asking for more feedback and looking for
opportunities to compromise.

If the final comment period passes without any substantive objections,
then the NAP can officially be marked `Accepted`. You should send a

> followup post notifying the thread (celebratory emoji optional but

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
follow-up post notifying the thread (celebratory emoji optional but
```

encouraged 🎉✨), and then update the NAP by setting its `:Status:`
to `Accepted`, and its `:Resolution:` header to a link to your

> followup post.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
follow-up post.
```

In unusual cases, when no consensus can be reached between core developers,
the [napari Steering Council] may be asked to decide whether a
controversial NAP is `Accepted`.

### Maintenance

In general, Standards track NAPs are no longer modified after they have
reached the Final state, as the code and project documentation are
considered the ultimate reference for the implemented feature. They may,
however, be updated under special circumstances.

Process NAPs may be updated over time to reflect changes
to development practices and other details. The precise process followed in
these cases will depend on the nature and purpose of the NAP being updated.

## Format and Template

NAPs are UTF-8 encoded text files using the [MyST markdown] format.  Please
see the {ref}`nap_template` file and the [MyST markdown cheat sheet] for
more information.  We use [Sphinx] to convert NAPs to HTML for viewing on
the web [^id4].

### Header Preamble

Each NAP must begin with a header preamble.  The headers
must appear in the following order.  Headers marked with `*` are
optional.  All other headers are required.

```
  :Author: <list of authors' real names and optionally, email addresses>

>   :Status: <Draft | Active | Accepted | Deferred | Rejected |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :Status: <Draft | Provisional | Active | Accepted | Deferred | Rejected |
```

I think we decided to add Provisional as a status (it's in the state diagram), but it needs to be included here too.

           Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
  :Type: <Standards Track | Process>

>   :Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :Created: <date created on, in yyyy-mm-dd format>
```

This format is not language dependent (i.e. `mmm` changes dependent on language whereas `mm` does not) and also sorts chronologically.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see we're actually using that format elsewhere, so I guess this one is just inconsistent.
